Once around, little red dots.
Now, what's this all about? These little
red dots are a class of tiny red colored
galaxies that were discovered by the
James Webb Space Telescope. Um, and 341
of them are cataloged in a survey in
2024, so fairly recently. There's an
illustration of a few of them and they
do indeed just look like little red dots
in the image to the right there. These
are of course very distant objects
indeed. We're talking about small
galaxies that were formed some 600
million years after the Big Bang. So
13.2
billion years ago in an epoch lasting
around a billion years from then. So
there's a range of distances and a range
of ages corresponding to that. And that
all corresponds to a very significant
amount of red shift. The expansion of
the universe that's occurred as the
light has come from these very ancient
objects all the way to us traveling
through space and the space has expanded
and stretched the wavelength. And the
zed factor, the amount of stretch, is in
the range of between four and eight for
most of these galaxies. There are some
reports that it's as low as two in some
cases, indicating a much nearer, younger
age, and possibly going as far back as
11, but most of them are in this middle
range, four to eight.
Now, we just don't see any objects like
this at more recent epochs closer by at
lower red shifts. We think these are
galaxies in formation and uh that
process has now stopped and so we just
don't see any in the modern universe at
all. They are tiny, 500 light years in
diameter maximum. Some of them are
smaller. That's around 2% the diameter
of our Milky Way. So very small indeed.
And it looks like those with higher red
shifts around the sort of eight mark are
smaller even than the nearer ones
indicating a degree of growth. And that
makes a lot of sense as we shall see.
We think that they are illuminated by h
the process of having an active galactic
nucleus. We see in the spectrum of the
light the absorption lines and emission
lines of the Balma series the uh
transitions of hydrogen gas and
those are very indicative of an active
galactic nucleus and AGN. We think
that's a a super massive black hole
where matter is spiraling in
getting very very hot through release of
gravitational energy and turning it into
heat via friction inside an accretion
disc before it falls into the black
hole. And that disc can end up at
hundreds of thousands or even millions
of degrees. And therefore a lot of very
high energy radiation can emerge from
the disc itself. And the disc can be
rotating incredibly rapidly. As it does
so, the magnetic fields get very highly
twisted and form jets. As you can see in
the image to the right of another AGN
and that rapid rotation rate means that
some of the disc is coming towards you,
some is going away from you. And that
creates a very widespread in the Doppler
shift, shifting some of the light
towards the red end of the spectrum,
some towards the blue end. and
broadening all those spectral lines. And
so that's uh really how the evidence is
stacking up. And what this is pointing
to is a process of inside out growth.
There's always been two competing
theories about how galaxies grow. The
inside out growth model or the inside
out quenching model. And the uh
predictions of those are different for
the way that the color of the galaxy
should change. In the lower model, the
quenching model, the red and blue
coloration should remain the same for a
long time until uh the latter stages.
Whereas in the inside out growth method,
the red color should decline much more
rapidly than the blue. And it seems that
that's what's uh happening here.
Now, another competing theory though is
that these objects are not really
galaxies at all, but are quazi stars.
A huge star that may have formed very
early on in the universe. clouds of the
primordial hydrogen and helium and maybe
a lot of dark matter left over from the
big bang all pulling together by gravity
and forming an absolute monster. And we
have a hypothetical size of a quai star
shown there compared to some of the
largest stars that we know of. Um so
these are truly vast.
They they would be anything from a
thousand to 10,000 solar masses. And at
that sort of size, they would very
rapidly end up crushing their cores with
the immense amount of gravity down to a
black hole in the center. And usually
when we have a collapse of a core in a
more reasonable size star that results
in such an energy release as all the
material falls deep into the gravity
well a huge amount of energy is released
and that's usually enough to then blast
the star apart.
But
here the star is so massive that the
outer envelope absorbs that energy. It
becomes very hot but doesn't disperse.
And so you end up with a very large
hydrogen helium envelope overlying a
central black hole that you can't see.
And of course, the material is still
going to gradually fall into the black
hole, releasing yet more gravitational
potential energy as it falls. And that's
going to power the star to be very hot
for a significant period of time. much
more power available that way than any
process of nuclear fusion can release.
It's one of the most efficient sources
of energy in the universe is
gravitational collapse. And so this
would make them very bright and thus
visible at such immense distances. And
the black hole will gradually grow as it
feeds on the material and probably
consume the whole star in 7 to 10
million years depending on how massive
they are in the first place. Um, and
become an intermediate mass black hole
in that sort of range of a thousand to
10,000 solar masses. And that may be
where super massive black holes get
their start in life. So, um, it's a bit
of a possibility that these things could
be one, the other, or both of an active
galactic nucleus or a quai star with a
black hole at its core. And maybe they
start off as one and end up forming into
the other. More research is needed. Now,
if you are interested in that sort of
thing, I've got a couple of videos that
you might really enjoy. One called Does
the Sun Have a Dark Heart? And the URL
is there, but I'm sure you can find it
by searching on my channel for those
words and the other thorn zitcow objects
and again the URL there. So please go
and have a look at those because they
talk to the same sort of idea of quai
and exotic hybrid stars. And with that,
thanks very much for listening and I'll
see you in the next one.